Talk is Wed Nov 13
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/about/events/seminars/2019/reference-based-viral-sequence-annotation-using-vadr

Reference-based viral sequence annotation using VADR

Abstract: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Thousands to millions of sequences of well studied human pathogenic
viruses, such as HIV, Influenza, Dengue virus, and Norovirus, exist in
publicly available databases like GenBank and ENA. In GenBank, many of
these sequences, with the exception of Influenza sequences, are not
consistently or thoroughly annotated with all known sequence features,
such as mature peptides and structural RNA regions. This is partly due
to the lack of a consistent analysis pipeline for these viral
sequences that could be applied at the time of submission. Influenza
is an exception, for which a specialized annotation tool has been in
use for the past several years at NCBI for influenza sequence
submissions. VADR (Viral Annotation DefineR) is a general tool for the
reference-based annotation and validation of viral sequences. Using
probabilistic models (hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and covariance
models (CMs)) of a RefSeq representative a viral species, VADR checks
input sequences for more than 40 different types of potential
problems, including early stop codons and regions of low similarity to
the RefSeq, and maps the RefSeq model annotation onto each sequence
via an alignment of the sequence to the RefSeq. VADR uses information
on the secondary structure of the reference model, when available, to
inform the alignment, and can annotate any feature from the reference
model down to a length of one nucleotide. At NCBI, VADR is currently
in use for the analysis of incoming Norovirus and Dengue virus
sequences. VADR is a general framework that can be extended to use
alignments of reference sequences instead of single sequences, and
could be useful for the validation and annotation of any conserved
sequence family or sequence feature with length up to about 20Kb. At
NCBI, we are currently testing alignment-based VADR models on the
automatic validation of incoming sequence submissions of the popular
metazoan marker gene cytochrome c oxidase 1 (Cox1), with the hope of
eventually extending its use to other commonly submitted marker genes.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Outline:
- Background 
  - GenBank is big (counts from GenBank paper)
  - Sequence submissions are handled by NCBI experts
  - Virus table
- one-model-per-feature strategy 
  - worked fine for norovirus but not for dengue 
  - examples of norovirus
  - examples of dengue failures
- one-model-per-genome strategy
  [summary of paper]
  - 4 stages
  - comparison with VAPiD and VIGOR
  - alerts, alert table
  - structural RNAs in Dengue
- marker genes
- conclusion: 
  - similar to xfam but looks for specific errors that 
    profile methods (hmmer/infernal) assume are not there. assumption
    is that observed sequence is non-artifactual
- future directions
  o alignments
  o profile-based protein validation replacing blastx
  o HMMER4: memory efficient alignment
